One of the most prolific, self-sustaining, and arguably exploitative genres on television today is the talk show. These are programs dedicated to pushing products, glamorizing celebrities, and maintaining a sense of status quo, all wrapped in the veneer of entertainment news. They’ve been in existence since the dawn of television, and while many newcomers have attempted to bring their personal touch to the genre, talk shows have remained unchanged, and unchallenged, for decades.

Enter Eric Andre. Relatively unknown, Andre got his start in the entertainment industry as a set production assistant on a few episodes of Curb Your Enthusiasm. From there, he received bit roles in various shows and small films before landing a more permanent role in ABC’s short-lived “Don’t Trust the B in Apartment 23.” While the show didn’t get renewed for a second season and was highly criticized for its polarizing title, it gathered a small following and helped kickstart Andre’s career, leading him to pitch his idea for an original television show to Cartoon Network’s late-night block Adult Swim. The idea? A manic, surreal, anti-talk show known as “The Eric Andre Show.”

The concept first crystalized with Andre himself when he approached show directors Andrew Barchilon and Kitao Sakurai with an idea for the show and a notebook full of “pages and pages of ideas, which were crazy and funny as hell” (FIRST PERSON). What was conceived was “a deconstruction of the late-night talk show format. We’re taking all the classic late-night talk show elements (opening monologue, celebrity guests, desk pieces, man-on-the-street segments) and coming at them with a psychotic, low-budget public access mentality” (FIRST PERSON). It seeks to smash everything normal that talk shows represent, and nowhere is that more evident than in the opening minute of every episode.

The first image is of an unmanned set. There’s a desk with a chair behind it on the right, an armchair on the left, and a hanging decoration in front of gold curtains. A voice announces, “Ladies and gentlemen, it’s the Eric Andre Show!” and the band starts playing just as Andre comes screaming into the frame, leaps off the armchair and through the back curtain. The band continues to play an upbeat, jazzy introduction piece as Andre runs to the band, picks up the drummer’s bass drum, and hurls it across the set. The music continues even as Andre tackles the drummer through the band’s backdrop, during which a production assistant replaces the bass drum with a spare. The next images are sporadic and vary on episode. Usually they involve using various weapons (chainsaws, bats, etc.) to further destroy the set, stunts that clearly cause Andre pain (setting himself on fire and being bitten by dogs), or props used in some bizarre way (chicken carcasses as boxing gloves). By the end of it, Andre is visibly exhausted and plops down on the only piece of furniture left: his chair. The rest of the set is completely destroyed. There are no curtains, there are wood fragments everywhere, and the set’s “EXIT” sign is clearly visible. Andre continues panting, covered in sweat, while a new pair of curtains drop behind him, another desk is rolled out in front of him, and his co-host Hannibal Buress enters.

Beyond being an incredibly energetic, schizophrenic, and destructive way of introducing the show, every opening also cements the show’s, and by proxy, Andre's, rhetorical statement. By literally destroying the set and having it replaced immediately after, many implications about talk shows are made. First, the band’s continued playing during the set’s destruction embodies a hyper-manifested sentiment that “the show must go on.” Nothing, no amount of disaster or danger, can deter the performance, and it speaks to the continued legacy of talk shows. Hosts can retire, interviews can be botched, and entire shows can go under, but the medium will survive. Second, Andre’s rage towards the stone-faced, white-laced normalcy that underlies the talk show circuit is demonstrated. Every blow against his set is a metaphorical attack on the establishment of talk shows. Third, the rapid reconstruction of the set by stagehands implies that a force outside the actual talk show hosts themselves prop up the facade that is the talk show. Whether it be producers, market demands, or the needs of the television audience, forces exterior to the titular hosts maintain the need and supply of talk shows. Finally, it shows how unfit Andre is as a talk show host, thereby implicating the necessities of a “good host.” Andre is both black and jewish, which he refers to as “bluish,” the shows two directors are jewish, and Hannibal is black. None of them fit the normative white-male status that is favored almost universally among mainstream talk shows, and as such, Andre’s reaction to the prescribed space is destructive. He doesn’t fit the mold, so much so that his natural inclination is to destroy it.

But what about the mold of talk shows is so repugnant to Andre? In order to fully explain Andre’s approach and meaning, a brief detour on how talk shows cemented themselves in American television cannon is necessary. This requires two separate, yet interconnected, ideas: that television’s inception and acceptance into the American familial home was aimed at legitimizing and normalizing consumer behavior, and that talk shows create avenues of socioeconomic and political control for advertisers to commodify content and audience.

When television sets were first being introduced to the American public, WW2 had ended and the idea of prosperity seemed alien. Collective memory pointed to the hardships and recession of the 30’s and 40’s as a reason to abstain from active consumerism, which ran contrary to the massive boom the end of the war gave to the U.S. Economy. The result was a population with money to spend and no incentives to spend it. George Lipchitz builds on this point in his text “The Meaning of Memory” when he says, “commercial network television played an important role in this emerging economy, functioning as a significant object of consumer purchases as well as an important marketing medium. Sales of sets jumped from three million during the entire decade of the 1940s to over five million a year during the 1950s. But television’s most important economic function came from its role as an instrument of legitimation for transformations in values initiated by the new economic imperatives of postwar America” (Lipchitz 359). He continues, “In addition, FCC decisions to allocate stations on the narrow VHF band, to grant the networks ownership and operation rights over stations in prime markets, and to place a freeze on the licensing of new stations during the important years between 1948 and 1952 all combined to guarantee that advertising-oriented programming based on the model of radio would triumph over theater TV, educational TV, or any other form. Government decisions, not market forces, established the dominance of commercial television” (Lipchitz 360). Postwar Americans, terrified of economic downturn while simultaneously inheriting the monetary benefits of wartime, required persuasion to turn to consumerism, which is exactly what the government and business elites did with television media. This alone should solidify how vital capital is to media and how it informs media’s intentions.

If television in general was designed to institutionalize capitalist consumerism, then talk shows specifically are designed to commodify content and audience. To commodify something is to take its use values— the practical value of something in one’s life— and transform it into exchange values, the dollar value of a product. Thus, commodification inherently removes meaning from product and replaces it with value. This action is nowhere more apparent than in talk shows. Here, there is no differentiation between content, or meaning, and product, or value. The content, whether it be a celebrity interview or political discussion, has no agenda but to serve the product (the celebrity’s movie or a certain political agenda engineered by the show’s executives), so they become indistinguishable. As Christine Quail states in “The Commodification of Talk Show Culture”, “through content commodification and intertextuality, talk shows’ intertextual commodities help blur the boundaries between program and advertisement, as the ads become topics around which shows are structured, such as a celebrity interview with an artist who showcases and distributes to the audience their new album” (Quail 34). This reliance on products to form content completely shatters the need for creativity, as “the creative process is transformed, making room for advertisers earlier in the writing and producing process and opening the door to further commodification. The talk show genre thus becomes more formulaic and restricted, as their reliance on revenues from intertexts limits the types of shows they produce” (Quail 37). It is not the show’s creators who decide content, but the show’s advertisers. If the content is reprehensible, the show cannot market itself to advertisers, and thus loses funding. This link between questionable content and being difficult to sell is the link that connects political economic influence to content control.

On top of this, talk shows also commodify audiences. Quail discusses the importance of talk show audiences when she says, “talk show audiences play an important role as media institutions bind together the audience, media, and advertisers. The reciprocal relationships are such that media sell audiences which perform three key functions for the survival of the system: audiences market goods to themselves, they learn to vote for candidates in the political sphere, and they reaffirm belief in the legitimacy of the politico economic system. Essentially, advertisers buy access to audiences” (Quail 37). Anytime a product is being pushed through a talk show, viewers should know that the financial transaction taking place has them as the item being sold.

From these observations, it’s clear that talk shows have been maintained by advertisers as a means of peddling products, ideology, and political agendas. Beyond being morally objectionable, the conventions of talk shows are ripe for satire, as the subversion of talk show tropes implies the subversion of American consumerism, which has become a growing concern in the information age. Rejection of consumerism is a sentiment gaining momentum on the backs of ludicrous “Black Friday” stories and a cultural emphasis on materialism propagated by corporations and big business. There is a widening gap between consumers and producers, one that is destabilizing the American middle class, and it is in that destabilization that Eric Andre seems to be most comfortable.

It’s difficult to discuss the intricacies of “The Eric Andre Show” without first mentioning how insane it is. It’s telling that each episode is only 11 minutes long and has no advertisements attached to it. Every moment of every episode, from top to bottom, is chaotic, surreal, and almost incomprehensible. This is important because it acts as a double-edged sword that both creates and disavows interpretations. The manic behavior of the show first embodies a sense of Andre’s character and creates avenues to interpret the show’s metaphorical meaning, but more importantly, it illustrates that no matter what interpretations are held, they have the potential to be disproven, or at the very least, made irrelevant. In terms of a metaphysical understanding, this completely eradicates any ability to understand the show’s politics. Any agenda or purpose on the producer’s part is obfuscated with layers of irony and uncertainty, further pushing the show into the nonsense category. Whether there is meaning behind the madness or it is simply done for laughs is still, and will continue to be, up for debate.

That said, the mechanisms of humor play out regardless of intention. If something is funny, it is funny for a reason. Theorists continue to debate whether it is the superiority theory or incongruity theory that holds more merit, but E. M. Dadlez argues in “Truly Funny: Humor, Irony, and Satire as Moral Criticism” that, “whichever theoretical position on the objects of humor is ultimately adopted, it remains significant that amusement can depend on the exposure of some previously unconsidered or neglected truth or on the exposure of a moral flaw” (Dadlez 2). Although “The Eric Andre Show” never quite does so explicitly, its subversion of talk show tropes implies an exposure of a neglected truth or moral flaw; in this case, that talk shows are inept and exist merely for the sake of exploitation. Andre exemplifies this notion when he exploits his guests, his crew, and the context of the “talk show” for humor’s, and possibly rhetorical, sake.

In comedy, context reigns supreme. Jokes depend on timing, culture, audience, and an infinite number of other variables. In her same piece, Dadlez states, “comedy is often a performance art, and comedy routines can depend on context for their effectiveness. Further, the context of the presentation can become, for at least some intents and purposes, part of the content of the joke” (Dadlez 5). For Andre, every misstep of the typical talk show script is a purposeful joke, which can be interpreted to interesting rhetorical effect. Through absurdity, trope inversion, and dark play, Andre depicts the talk show industry as a desolate and insane arena of exploitation.

In one surreal moment from season 1, episode 9, Andre and his co-host Hannibal Buress’s conversation is interrupted by a flashing red alarm with the words “Crew Lunch” printed beneath it. Andre then stands from his chair, picks up a presumably heavy bucket from beside the bookshelf, and drags it to the center of the set. Then, as he pours the contents of the bucket (which appear to be macaroni) onto a tarp made of newspaper, a pack of five crew members rush onto the set and begin shoveling the slop into their mouths with their hands. Off-set, another crew member looks on hungrily. This brief moment, which lasts all of 30 seconds, illustrates the industry as impoverish, slave-like, and contradicts the “if you’re on TV, you’re wealthy!” attitude that most talk shows engineer. The crew is apparently exploited for labor and are treated like cattle. Similarly, in season 1, episode 1, Andre is in the middle of introducing a guest when a disembodied voice informs him that “it’s time to play ‘This-or-That’!” While Andre and Buress look off confused, two podiums are rolled out before them, and they reluctantly stand behind them. The voice asks if they are ready, and they both reply “no.” The camera then lingers for a moment before focusing on an image of a Chinese man practicing some sort of body exercise on a hillside. The voice then asks, “Yoga, or Tai Chi?” Andre suggests Tai Chi, and the voice tells him they could not hear him. As a result, a cup of hot coffee is thrown into his face. This exchange of question and coffee into Andre’s face continues, the skit eventually ending when a large, biker-type man slams a hammer through Andre’s hand. Besides the immense physical pain placed on Andre, the disembodied voice dictating the form of the show is a characterization of the forces that control mainstream talk show content. This skit is a subtle nod to a belief in “the powers that be” and their puppeteer control over media. It’s also a clever inversion of the games commonly featured on talk shows.

Another inverted trope Andre utilizes are his notecards. Generally, talk show hosts gather critical information about their guests and localize it on notecards for easy access. In Andre’s perverted world, not only is he inept even with his notecards, but the few glances we get of them are sheer absurdity. In season 1, episode 5, during an interview with Dr. Drew Ordon, who is another talk show host on “The Doctors”, Andre’s notes are shown, one of which is a crudely-drawn NASA rocket flying upwards into a naked, hairy butt, and the other is some sort of big-lipped, pot-bellied naked monkey who holds a boomerang and sports high heels. Needless to say, they’re absurd. The very notion that Andre can somehow gather his notes from these high-school-notebook doodles implies Andre to be a sort of savant, or at least that someone else is writing his notes for him. Either way, this inversion of the popular trope illustrate how absurd Andre and his show are. In the same episode, there is a brief image of a nudist colony before Andre runs through fully clothed in business attire proclaiming, “we’re going reverse-streaking!” These two examples demonstrate the show’s use of inverted context to build humor, arguably exploiting the talk show for its tropes.

Guests also present numerous avenues of exploitation and inversion. In season 1, episode 6, after Sinbad (the real Sinbad) tells a rather licentious tale about how a pimp “hooked him up” with a place to sleep with the caveat that he couldn’t use the room during the day, Andre and Buress joke back and forth about whether or not he cleaned the sheets. Sinbad appears unamused, eventually settling them by telling them that maids cleaned the rooms. Mere moments after, a bell rings, and Andre yells that it’s time for “the wheel of prizes.” From behind the curtain, a spinning wheel is rolled out, with colored segments spelling out prizes such as “Fun Times,” “Big Bucks,” “Move to North Korea,” and “Death.” Andre spins the wheel and he and Buress began chanting “yeah!” as it spins and spins and spins. Just when it appears to be stopping, its momentum is restarted and the two continue chanting. The wheel spins for a full 50 seconds before Sinbad finally stands up and stops the wheel with his hand, accepting “Move to North Korea” as his prize. He then sits down looking distraught, somewhat regretful, and the segment ends. Here, Sinbad’s presence is exploited by Andre as a reaction piece to his inverted antics. There is even a bit of dark play here, as Sinbad has no idea of their intentions. He doesn’t know he is being milked for a reaction.

Dark play also manifests in other guest segments. While some guests appear to be in on the joke, many are not. In season 1, episode 4, model and actress Brandi Glanville appears as a guest, and for a majority of the interview, things are relatively tame. Andre dips his feet in spaghetti, Buress swaps his glasses out every frame, and the questions are risqué, but nothing catastrophic occurs. Then, as Andre asks another question about Glanville’s womb, a muffled voice is heard talking off-screen. While Glanville responds, Andre calls out the one talking, telling him, “[he] can hear him talking the whole fucking interview,” and asks ‘Andrew’ if he can talk to him for a second. “And bend over,” Glanville jokingly says while Andrew approaches the desk. Andre then reaches across the desk and tackles Andrew through it. Glanville jumps from her chair, exclaiming, “oh my god!” and looking worriedly at the camera while Andre berates Andrew and the clip ends. For the majority of the interview, Glanville could be thinking that the show is perhaps in bad taste, but she is in no way expecting things to turn out the way they do. While Andre, Andrew, and Buress can anticipate and interpret what happens, she cannot. For her, there is no humor, only shock. But for the audience, it is her reaction that drives the scene’s humor. She is being purposefully deceived for dramatic and humorous effect.

While these instances illustrate how “The Eric Andre Show” inverts and deconstructs common talk show tropes, there is another way in which Andre depicts his ineptitude for success: his ethnicity. As previously stated, Andre is black and jewish, and he sometimes uses his ethnicity as a means of appropriating humor. In season 1, episode 1, Andre and two unnamed others invade a civil war reenactment, posing as two slaves running from their master. This sketch highlights the often purposefully-neglected memory of slavery in civil war reenactments and other nostalgic pretenses. By using his skin color as an object of humor and posing as a slave, Andre underscores his incompatibility with talk shows while also employing dark play on the participants of the event. They don’t know his motive or that they’re being recorded as the butt of a joke.

Not everyone is openly receptive of this dark play. During an interview with Lauren Conrad, a television personality and fashion designer, Andre vomits on his desk and then begins slurping it back up. In response, Conrad gags and runs off set. During an interview with The Onion’s AV Club, Andre responded: “Her publicist flipped out on us and tried to get us banned all their clients. They called us and said, ‘You can’t air this!’ It was chaos. They were like, ‘He drew a swastika on his face!’ The publicist literally said this: ‘He drew a swastika on his face, and my grandparents died in the Holocaust!’ I’m black and Jewish. Hannibal’s black. My two directors are both Jewish. We’re not exactly the Aryan Nation” (Modell). It’s clear from the quote that Andre has no sensitivity when it comes to his ethnicity or its history, but this quote also underscores another point: nearly everyone involved in the show’s production is jewish. It’s a known entity that much of Hollywood and the entertainment industry is run by jews, and that may have contextual grounds for interpretation, but another aspect of the producer’s Judaism is their assumed knowledge on jewish comedy.

This knowledge is perhaps fully formed in the first season’s fading image. Andre, in a vacant and dimly-lit set, picks up a magic 8-ball and asks it if he’ll ever “make it.” He then shakes the ball as the camera zooms into it and a series of on-the-street interviews play out. In each, someone other than Andre himself asks strangers what they think of the show or Andre. The responses are unanimously negative. They haven’t heard of him, they think the show is boring, or he literally doesn’t exist. While these play, images of Andre weeping on the streets are intercut before the image finally fades to black and a placard appears stating, “R.I.P. Eric Andre. April 4, 1983 - March 10, 2028.” Beyond the surreal mention of Andre’s future death date and the obvious implication that he’s a failure, there is a scathing sense of self-deprecation that seems rooted in jewish tradition. Like Woody Allen and Jerry Seinfeld before him, Andre depicts himself as a loser, a shlemiel.

There are many facets to the humor of “The Eric Andre Show.” On one hand, everything is easily dismissible as nonsense due to the show’s rampant pace and altered editing. But on the other, Andre’s employment of several humorous techniques and theories to deconstruct the American talk show seem anything but coincidental. From the destruction of the set, to the dark play used to deceive guests, to Andre’s use of ethnicity as both an identification beacon and as material for satire, “The Eric Andre Show” is engineered to critique the moral vacuity rampant in talk shows. Strictly speaking from a rhetorical perspective, Andre’s show is one the most interesting and dense talk shows ever conceived, and judging from the fact that it was recently renewed for a fourth season, audiences seem to agree. There’s no predicting what “The Eric Andre Show” could become, and that’s a part of what makes it special. While others stand stout in their predetermined scripts, Andre makes headway wherever he goes, cutting a path for future post-modern comedians and leaving a trail of pained, confused laughter in his wake. Through its absurdism, use of dark play, and inversion, “The Eric Andre Show” deconstructs the talk show format, morally critiquing the institution for its universal exploitation.
